---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: The Secret of Corporate Success....
author:
  display_name: Angela Hontau
  login: torchwood909
  email: angelahontau@gmail.com
  url: ''
author_login: torchwood909
author_email: angelahontau@gmail.com
wordpress_id: 943
wordpress_url: http://theonj.com/?p=943
date: '2012-08-08 04:50:47 -0400'
date_gmt: '2012-08-08 04:50:47 -0400'
categories:
- Business Articles
tags:
- Business
---
<p>The secret is the opposite of what is being done. Instead of swindling the customers of every penny they have, a great business will attempt to exceed a customer’s expectations, surprise them with quality work (yes quality produces are becoming more and more rare these days). After all if it does not break, why would anyone buy another one. Just for that reason, because it lasted and now I want my mother to have something that is durable and reliable, my daughter, my son, my husband, and I will also tell all my friends. To quote one of the many Amazon employees who were asked how they like working there, a response which describes the environment quite well is: “it’s not bad - rather rad.” It’s an even more powerful statement than another coworker who wrote that she absolutely loves it.</p>
<p>Why? Because Amazon knows the secret, but how many other companies behave that way? Much too few! And it is no wonder than Facebook and Zynga are heading for a major collapse. Zynga is a slave shop, while Facebook threatens privacy. Companies that disrespect their employees and their customers but remain profitable present a critical problem when other companies start to copy their behavior.</p>
<p>How did my father and I start a successful business? First and foremost, we treated each customer with respect. We did not hide the fact that we are happy to have their business. Too many companies today behave as if it is shameful or counter intuitive to let their customer know that how happy they are to have their business.</p>
<p>The success lies in exceeding the customer expectations, without forgetting that employees are also customers. Wild idea? Not in the least. Why is Amazon.com so successful? Because a defective product can be returned without any problems at all. Because people enjoy working for Amazon, so Amazon fit my definition of success. They have built an empire store where you can find almost any product you desire, quality products, in a place where it is a pleasure to shop because as a customer you can be certain that no one can swindle you by selling you last year’s refurbished models. Why? Because if they do, you just return the product and give the company a bad feedback. Moreover, the customers and not the only ones who are happy. Amazon knows that employees are customers also, and has created a pleasant working environment. How? I do not know. I am not fortunate enough to work there, but since people have a tendency to complain more than to express happiness, the fact that every quote I found from an Amazon employee had something good to stay about the working conditions at Amazon, I take that as strong evidence that Amazon has discovered the success, which I knew a long time ago. </p>
<p>I knew it because I learned it while I studied abroad in Australia at the University of Wollongong (about an hour from Sydney). When I returned to the US, I knew more about marketing than many students who finish with a marketing degree. That is partly why I changed my major from marketing to CIS. I was already  well educated about what makes a new business succeed, and what causes so many to fail. If you detected a hidden insult toward education in the United States, you are clever and on point. Did you make this deduction because I praised the University of Wollongong more than I praised my University in the States, which if you notice, I did not even name. I went to Rider University, and this is truly a remarkable University, nevertheless, I learned very little about marketing at Rider. </p>
<p>Attending Rider University had been one of the most amazing and pleasurable experiences of my entire life. Wow you might wonder, but Angie, you went to the Metropolitan to see Plácido Domingo in one of his last performances, you saw Orbital and Underworld live in concert, you spend New Year’s Eve in France, you got to see Kind Lear directed by Michael Kahn at the Shakespeare Theater in Washington DC, how could studying at Rider prove as pleasurable as those wonderful events? Yes, surprisingly so, it was. And the reason was that while I studied at Rider I dedicated myself fully to my education. I was there to study, not to party or to get drunk, which so many college students do, despite any negative consequences the sleepless nights of fun and debauchery can have one one's academic performance. It is a skewed up culture, where going to frat parties and drinking all night is behavior considered more toward the norm at a University than studying.</p>
<p>I am not against having fun, but for me parties are of a lower priority than learning. And for fun, during my summer break, I drove 45 minutes to a small school where I took classes which prepared me for the exam I had to pass in order to get my real estate license in the state of New Jersey. I enjoyed the courses extremely, and I passes the exam the exam the first time I took it with a very high grade. It is great that I enjoyed this class so much because after getting my license, I realized that selling is a talent, similar to acting or singing - all talents that I do not possess (although I am a pretty good writer). </p>
<p>Rider was such remarkable experience exactly because there I learned not only business and computers but also law, biology, psychology, and literature, courses which made me terribly curious, and ambitious. Because literature was a passionate hobby from an early age (I was reading Thomas Hardy at the age of 7, and Stendhal at the age of 12), I started working toward for a Master's Degree in Classical Literature at George Mason University, where I attended classes in the evening (after work).</p>
<p>Moreover, having a degree not only in computers but also in business gave me the knowledge to start working at United Languages, a translations company started by my father while I was in college. After graduation I helped him run it. At United Languages, I has many different roles. I worked as a manager by interacting directly with our clients and our employees. In the "marketing department," I focused on searching for new target markets, small niches in the market, previously ignored by the big corporations. Our advertising was mainly placing fliers around the library, and other places where people were taking ESL classes. From these ads, we got work from clients who had dissertations and articles specialized to a specific field, which had to be translated into English in order to be taken seriously by US Universities, a database helped us keep track of their name, languages, and other accomplishments. This was critical because if a client needed to translate an article written in German about a complex medical procedure, our translator had to know the language and to have a medical background. We were able to use the database to match the best translators for each job by writing SQL queries in our database,</p>
<p>Note: Amazon.com did not offer me any endorsements for praising their excellent managerial skills. </p>
